This paper focuses on whether the ISA being RISC or CISC is relevant to performance. The author demonstrated how experiments were conducted to factor out the irrelevant parts, and gave results of 4 comparable processors(x86/ARM, mobile/desktop) on different tasks. From the experiments it can be seen that ISA does not play an important role in determining chip performance.

In the past it is generally believe that CISC have better performance over RISC. However, this is likely because that RISC dominates mobile markets, whereas CISC gained popularity in desktop and server markets, which is due to area and chip design complexity. In recent years, as constraints shift from area/complexity to power and energy, the market boundary between RISC and CISC blurred. CISC chips are gaining popularity on mobile devices, and RISC-based servers have also been produced. This brings us to the question about whether ISA actually determines chip performance. The author conducted several experiments to find out the answer. However, to solidify the results, the experiments have to be carefully designed to factor out irrelevant factors. For example, micro-architecture designs such as memory, frequency, tech node, number of cores can impact processor performance. Working with different OS, compilers and tasks also influences how chips are evaluated. The actual difference between RISC and CISC remains in 3 parts: instruction format, operations and operands. Thus, the author eliminates irrelevant factors by methods such as normalizing power to 45nm tech node, normalize frequency to 1Gz to use cycle counts, and also conducting experiments on multiple tasks and benchmarks to identify outliers. After the experiments, the author has found that ISA performance effects are indistinguishable between x86 and ARM, as they showed similar instruction counts on a range of benchmarks. Cycle gaps exists, but are less than 2.5x. The actual performance and energy use of specific processors actually depends on the micro-architecture differences, which is primarily determined by design choices. The author also listed technical challenges met during the experiment, which provided a reference for future researchers. 

I think the paper have done an excellent experiment, by carefully identifying and factoring out irrelevant factors, only leaving the underlying 3 factors differentiating ISAs: Format, operations and operands. The author also carefully selected four RISC and CISC chips that share the most similarities. The results of this paper, especially the one which showed cycle counts are similar, is a very convincing point that it’s the micro-architecture instead of the ISAs that determine performance. However, some part of the paper is based on coarse assumptions. For example, by assuming 20% of the i7’s power is static is a quite random guess. 
